 

                                CITY OF CHARLOTTESVILLE  
                             To be a place where everyone thrives.  
                          Housing Advisory Committee  


                                                     
                          Wednesday, November 12, 2025, noon  
                    Location: 100 Fifth Street NE, Charlottesville, VA 22902  
                            CitySpace - Large Conference Room 

     HAC Members Present:                      HAC Members Absent: 
        •  Joy Johnson, Chair, Affordable         •  Phil d'Oronzio, Real Estate 
           Housing Beneficiary (JJ)                  Professional (PdO) 
        •  Sunshine Mathon, Vice Chair, Non-      •  John Sales, Non-profit - 
           profit - Piedmont Housing Alliance        Charlottesville Redevelopment & 
           (SM)                                      Housing Authority (JS) 
        •  Mike Parisi, Secretary, At-Large           
           (MCP)                               Staff Attendees: 
        •  Rich Bard, Affordable Housing          •  Madelyn Metzler, Acting Housing 
           Beneficiary (RB)                          Program Manager, Neighborhood 
        •  Heather Griffith, Real Estate             Development Services (MM) 
           Professional (HG)                    
        •  Peppy Linden, At-Large (PL)         Online Attendees: 
        •  Michael Payne, City Councilor (MP)     •  Wendy Gao, Public Housing 
        •  Dan Rosensweig, Non-profit - Habitat      Association of Residents (PHAR) 
           for Humanity (DR)                      •  Kathleen Glenn-Matthews, CRHA 
        •  Nicole Scro, Real Estate Professional  •  Paul Reeder, city resident 
           (NS) 
      
1.   Welcome 
      SM: Calls meeting to order 12:05pm. 

2.   Introductions and Attendance 
3.   Staff Updates 
      MM: Not a lot of updates, last HAC meeting 3 weeks ago. Going to Council next month 
      re: CSRAP (Charlottesville Supplementary Rental Assistance Program), amendments. 
      NS: Has HUD’s Fair Market Rent figure gone up or down? 
      MM: Not marked for change right now. 


                                                                    Page 1 of 5  

      MCP: FMR released in August, 1 bedroom ~$1600, 2 bedroom $1800, 3 bedroom 
      $2200. 
      MM: CAHF (Charlottesville Affordable Housing Fund) applications are open, workshop 
      for applicants last week. Not as many applicants as for HOPS (Housing Operations 
      and Program Support grant program) typically. 
      Receiving Kindlewood and CRHA applications, JPA and Ivy student housing buildings. 
      Shows City’s Development Dashboard with current and upcoming projects. Not shown 
      is Vista29 by SupportWorks (formerly Virginia Supportive Housing) at Premier Circle 
      site. 
      PL: Did City Council vote on CRHA director being able to designate a proxy 
      representative to attend HAC meetings? 
      MM: Not on Council agenda right now. 
      JJ: Not enough orgs focused on deep affordability right now. Only CRHA, PHA, HfH. 
      Not enough units available that accept housing vouchers. If someone loses a voucher, 
      likely to become homeless. 
      SM: In talking with City Manager Sam Sanders (SS), using example of 501 Cherry 
      Avenue project which has 30%, 50%, 60% AMI units. 30% AMI is 10% of all units. 
      Applied to CAHF for money to buy down debt in order to bring 60% AMI units to 30% 
      AMI at a cost of $150,000 per unit. Got funding for 2 units at $250,000. Similar request 
      for MACAA project. SS wanted to know how much it costs to go from various levels of 
      AMIs, 60% to 50% etc. Made spreadsheet with amounts, $60-130k per unit (one time 
      payments), depends on bedroom type. Hoping to spur conversation with City Council 
      about creating deeper affordability. 
      MM: City Council holding an Affordable Housing Work Session in December. 
      Also reviewing proposals from 3 consultants re: Housing Department reorganization, 
      Kellie Brown (KB) NDS Director is leading. What are the typical staffing, skills, activities 
      of housing departments in similar sized cities? Primary activity in here in Cville is grant 
      management, CSRAP program. 
      DR: How much time is spent reviewing quarterly reports? Not much changes in 
      between quarterly reports. Interesting to put all review obligations on the table, what is 
      statutory, what is Council action, can we help staff free up time? 
      SM: Comments from reviewers due at the end of this week. RFP timeline consultant 
      has ~8 weeks, timeline mid-Q1 work completion (Feb, Mar). 
      MM: Three more housing funding agreements need to be developed in next 6 months, 
      but that staff member is no longer here. Complexity and knowledge required not on 
      staff at present. 

4.   Agenda 
   a. October 15, 2025, Regular HAC Meeting Minutes 

      Approved 


                                                                    Page 2 of 5          

b. Review of FY2025 HAC Annual Work Calendar 
   MM: Reviews Workplan items 
   One update, HAC did fill an affordable housing beneficiary slot (member Rich Bard), 
   but not as a result of recruitment as described in workplan. 
   MP: Memo from City Attorney re: payments to board members, but no timeline. 
   MM: Changes to ADU Manual haven’t gone to City Council yet, but going through 
   another round of changes re: in-lieu fee structures. 
   NS: Confusing on website what the latest ADU Manual is. Could use a redline version 
   to show changes. 
   MM:  Can fix that broken link. 
   DR: Distinction between ADU Program changes and Zoning Ordinance changes. HAC 
   hasn’t been brought any material on discussion of Zoning Ordinance changes. Staff 
   has been helpful, but the Zoning Ordinance isn’t helping affordable housing. 
   Engineering requirements, other pieces are still in the way. See some areas where 
   HAC’s expertise and experience would be beneficial; Zoning Ordinance is very 
   significant and situations like this are why HAC was created. Would like to see this be 
   a HAC priority over the next several months. 
   KB inherited process of improvements to the Zoning Ordinance. Tiers of changes, Tier 
   one is typos, simple changes, Tier Two more complex, Tier Three largest. A lot of 
   what's happening is great, but areas where it could be more comprehensive. 
   JJ: West Main Street, LV Collective project discussion should be in Tier Two. PHAR 
   didn’t realize the implications of the Zoning Ordinance on Westhaven and 10th & Page. 
   Can’t pay attention to everything that happens in the city. Ex: 7th St Project breaks my 
   heart. Hearing church hymns is important to the community, this project would block 
   that, and separate people in the neighborhood from a crucial part of their community. 
   NS: A benefit of a Land Bank would be an organization focused on community-based 
   development. Might be able to take action in context of proposed student housing 
   projects that are being opposed by community. 
   MM: Re: Landlord Risk Reduction Fund, question of resources needed to start. On the 
   list, along with Land Bank and Tax Abatement program, of what would return most 
   benefit once more staff has been hired. HAC has done their part, question of staff 
   capacity. 
   Re: Place-Based Incentives, on staff’s radar. I.e., City-funded project-based-voucher 
   program. Not explicitly connected to a TIF (Tax Increment Financing) right now. 
   SM: Pushing for a while about fee waivers for affordable housing developments. 
   Building permit fees $200-300,000. PHA essentially taking money from City in aid, then 
   returns it to City for these fees. Discussed at recent Virginia Housing meetings, Cville 
   is most expensive area in the state to develop. 
   MM: Reduced tap fees for water and sewer, promissory notes, waivers possible, but 
   not quick or easy for staff to manage and process.  


                                                                 Page 3 of 5          

SM: Propose choosing three items to focus on for 2026 using straw poll approach. 
Runs through items, HAC members acknowledge whether it’s a top three priority or 
not. 
      TOPIC                               VOTES 
Zoning Ordinance and related regulations  9 
Land Acquisition and Holding              7 
Member Orientation and Recruitment        0 
Payment in Lieu of Taxes (PILOT)          0 
Landlord Risk Reduction Fund              1 
Tax Abatement                             ? 
Place Based Incentives                    6 
Fee Waiver Programs                       1 
Budget Advocacy                           3 
DR: 7 years ago, proposed and developed an Intervention Analysis Tool based on City 
study of affordable housing shortage and goal of 4,000 affordable units by 2040–would 
be useful now. Individual decisions are being made, but no framework for decision-
making or references back to overall goal. Need examination and categorization of all 
possible interventions across policy, organizations and their costs. This is how we got 
to $10M year affordable housing funding figure. In the meantime, a lot of turnover 
among staff and City Managers. Compares using the prior analysis tool to using a 
proforma for a real estate project to help guide where you’re going. 
NS: Encouraged by 3TP’s model, could be used in this context.  
SM: Affordable Housing Plan provides broad goals, but not how to achieve or measure 
actions. 
JJ: Discussions with Jeff Meyers, Sunshine, John Sales helped us understand costs 
involved in building a unit of affordable housing.  
KGM: Essential to have knowledge and think about how conditions are changing 
rapidly, a tool can inform decision-making and point out gaps, size of gaps, funding 
necessary. 
SM: Change in AMI analysis, rent for 30% AMI household now 63% more than in 2017 
(w/o voucher). Construction costs are also increasing, aid/subsidy climate is not 
favorable right now. 
MP: Notes that it’s not explicit that in-lieu fees are on top of $10M affordable housing 
commitment. 
DR: This would help show constraints, impacts of $ for Council. Notes only $800,000 
looking for new funding from affordable housing fund right now. 


                                                              Page 4 of 5  

      SM: 4,000 unit gap is both about unit construction, also programs that help people stay 
      in their units. List includes CRHA replacement units, addition units, PHA units, 
      permanent supportive housing units, Affordable Dwelling Units, Low Income Housing 
      Tax Credit units, but also many other interventions depending on where people are on 
      the spectrum of need. 
      TOPIC                         VOTES             VOTES (round 2) 
      Ordinance and related regulations 9             8 
      Land Acquisition and Holding  7            
      Member Orientation & Recruitment 0 
      PILOT                         0 
      LRRF                          1 
      Tax Abatement                        
      Place Based Incentives        6           2 
      Fee Waiver Programs           1 
      Budget Advocacy/IAT           3           8 
      DR: Need City Manager support for HAC priorities but also notes that Council is CM’s 
      boss. 
      MM: December City Council Work Session on Affordable Housing agenda will discuss 
      bringing down AMI for LIHTC projects (location-based subsidies), land acquisition, 
      CSRAP. 
      MP: January Work session re: West Main Street zoning. Tier 3-ish item. 

5.   Public Comment 
      Paul Reeder: Lived in Cville since 1994, 211 5th St SW. Re: 7th St student housing 
      development. James Freas told developer they were within 0.5 mile radius of UVA 
      Grounds; patently untrue. City definition of 0.5 radius is too expansive, includes historic 
      hospital, pocket park as part of UVA Grounds. Notes railroad makes grounds non-
      contiguous, and language in ordinance about definition of what is “grounds” i.e., 
      Central Grounds and North Grounds. Freas’ interpretation is against the spirit and 
      letter of ordinance. NDS Planner Reed Broadhead in process of making final 
      determination now. Contribution of in-lieu fees should not be cut in half. I will appeal to 
      Board of Zoning Appeals if City staff determines project is within 0.5 mile radius. 
      DR: Diff btw half and full payment for this project? 
      PR: $2-3M vs ~$5M 

6.   Next Scheduled Meeting: December 17, 2025 
7.   Adjourn 

     Adjourned 2:00pm. 


                                                                    Page 5 of 5 